✨ Update MHC proposal with new annotation strategy (#2920)
kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api: docs/proposals/20191030-machine-health-checking.md

- Provide a mechanism to guarantee that application quorum for N members is maintained at any time.

## Proposal

> The machine health checker (MHC) is responsible for marking machines backing unhealthy Nodes with an annotation so that can be remediated by their owning controller.

Reviewer: Just a nit-pick
...Nodes with an annotation so that **they** can be remediated...

- For a machine with no nodeRef an opinionated value could be assumed e.g 10 min.

### Remediation:

> - The controller owning that `Machine`, e.g machineSet observes the annotation and issues a deletion request for the machine.
> - The machine controller reconciles towards the expected number of replicas and start the process to bring up a new `Machine`.
> - The machine controller drains the node.
> - The machine controller and the provider implementation delete the cloud instance.
> - The machine controller removes the finalizer for the `Machine` resource.

Reviewer 2: We might want to relax these conditions, and probably just say something like:
```suggestion
- Remediation is not an integral part or responsibility of MachineHealthCheck. This controller only functions as a mean for others to act when a Machine is unhealthy in the best way possible.
```

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

#### Machine annotation:
```go
const MachineUnhealthyAnnotation = "machine.cluster.x-k8s.io/unhealthy"
```

This annotation is applied by the MHC controller and it is expected that it
will never be removed. The only current mediation strategy is deletion, which

> is to be handled by the machines owning controller.

Reviewer 3: nit: took me a moment to interpret this, could also be clearer maybe if it were `is to be handled the controller owning the machine.`
```suggestion
is to be handled by the machine's owning controller.
```

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

#### Machine annotation:
```go

> const MachineUnhealthyAnnotation = "machine.cluster.x-k8s.io/unhealthy"

Reviewer 2: I'm wondering if this should be have a time as value?

Reviewer 2: We need to expand this section to give some guarantees, for example if this is a timestamp, do we keep updating the annotation at every reconciliation?

Reviewer 4: As an aside, to support different external remediation (outside of the owning controller), such as the request from #2846, would it make sense to allow for overriding the annotation key here?

Reviewer 2: Having different timestamps, while interesting, also means unfortunately that the Machine and everything that watches them is going to be updated every time the check is performed :/

>to support different external remediation (outside of the owning controller), such as the request from #2846, would it make sense to allow for overriding the annotation key here?

I'd expect that at some point (proposal tbd) that we'll allow different strategies for remediation.

Maybe to start, we should have a simple annotation with no timestamp on it?

Reviewer 5: Is it possible to have also an annotation that signals when the machine is not healthy but the timeout is not yet reached (machine under probation)

Reviewer 3: I'd say that until we have a use case for it being a timestamp, let's not add that extra complexity

Reviewer 6: Also, you can't trust it

- Calculate the number of unhealthy targets.
- Compare current number against `maxUnhealthy` threshold and temporary short circuits remediation if the threshold is met.

> - Trigger remediation for unhealthy targets i.e apply the unhealthy annotation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Annotates unhealthy target machines as described above.
```

We should also make sure that

Out of band:

> - The owning controller e.g machineSet observes the annotation and requests the machine for deletion.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The owning controller observes the annotation and is responsible to remediate the machine.
```

Reviewer 2: That sounds good to me. I was thinking maybe the annotation should have the strategy spelled out, something like: I have a health check, I expect this to be deleted.

> - The owning controller reconciles to meet number of replicas and start the process to bring up a new machine/node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

I don't think we should be explicit about it

- Calculate the number of unhealthy targets.
- Compare current number against `maxUnhealthy` threshold and temporary short circuits remediation if the threshold is met.
- Annotates unhealthy target machines as described above.

Out of band:
- The owning controller observes the annotation and is responsible to remediate the machine.
- The machine controller drains the unhealthy node.
- The machine controller provider deletes the instance.

> - The owning controller MUST delete the machine.

Reviewer 3: I realise this maintains the original ordering, but if this list is ordered, the owning controller deleting the machine triggers the drain and instance delete so shouldn't it come first?

Might also be worth adding something along the lines of `The owning controller performs any pre-deletion tasks required` to this list?

![Machine health check](./images/machine-health-check/mhc.svg)

### Risks and Mitigations

## Alternatives

This proposal was originally adopted and implemented having the MHC do the
deletion itself. This was revised since it did not allow for more complex
controllers, for example the Kubeadm Control Plane, to account for the

> reconciliations strategies they require.

Reviewer 3: Should this be remediation?
```suggestion
remediation strategies they require.
```

- Calculate the number of unhealthy targets.
- Compare current number against `maxUnhealthy` threshold and temporary short circuits remediation if the threshold is met.
- Annotates unhealthy target machines as described above.

Out of band:
- The owning controller observes the annotation and is responsible to remediate the machine.
- The owning controller performs any pre-deletion tasks required.

> - The owning controller MUST delete the machine.

Reviewer 7: Why must the machine be deleted?

Reviewer 2: For the purpose of this effort, which is mainly to separate the responsibilities between controllers, we want to make sure the expected outcomes are spelled out.

In the future, when new proposals come out and have new strategies, we'll redesign this.

## Alternatives

Considered having the MHC do the deletion itself. This was discarded since it
did not allow for more complex controllers, for example the Kubeadm
Control Plane, to account for the reconciliations strategies

> they require.

Reviewer 4: Since the current implementation was implemented, I think we should call that out specifically here. The current text seems a bit revisionist.

Author: Hah, yes it did seem strange but it also seemed strange to be altering an implemented proposal 🤷 . I'll try to update it to make it more clear.

### Version Skew Strategy [optional]

## Implementation History
- [ ] MM/DD/YYYY: Proposed idea in an issue or [community meeting]
- [ ] MM/DD/YYYY: Compile a Google Doc following the CAEP template (link here)
- [ ] MM/DD/YYYY: First round of feedback from community
- [ ] MM/DD/YYYY: Present proposal at a [community meeting]
- [ ] MM/DD/YYYY: Open proposal PR

> 

Reviewer 4: I think keeping the Implementation history in some manner here would be helpful to track the change between MHC-initiated deletion and the newer annotation approach.

Author: I agree, I was removing this since it was never filled out in the first place. I can retroactively create it, but I was just cleaning this up.
